Add Progressively Enhance your PWA article (#3178)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/progressively-enhance-your-pwa/index.md

  </figcaption>
</figure>

And even super recent ES&nbsp;2020 language additions like
[optional chaining](https://caniuse.com/#feat=mdn-javascript_operators_optional_chaining) and
[nullish coalescing](https://caniuse.com/#feat=mdn-javascript_operators_nullish_coalescing)
have reached support really quickly. You can see a code sample below.
When it comes to core JavaScript features, the grass couldn't be much greener than it
is today.

```js
const adventurer = {
  name: 'Alice',
  cat: {
    name: 'Dinah',
  },
};
console.log(adventurer.dog?.name);
// Expected output: undefined
console.log(0 ?? 42);
// Expected output: 0
```

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--fullbleed">
  <img src="1000020100000640000003E810E16D93C747B2D5.png"
       alt="The iconic Windows XP green grass background image.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption w-figcaption--fullbleed">
    The grass is green when it comes to core JavaScript features.
    (Microsoft product screenshot, used with
    <a href="https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/legal/intellectualproperty/permissions/default">permission</a>.)
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## The sample app: Fugu Greetings

For this article, I work with a simple PWA, called

> [Fugu Greetings](https://tomayac.github.io/fugu-greetings/public/).

Reviewer: Also link to the repository?

Author: Good idea.

> [Fugu Greetings](https://tomayac.github.io/fugu-greetings/public/).

Author: ```suggestion
[Fugu Greetings](https://tomayac.github.io/fugu-greetings/public/)
([GitHub](https://github.com/tomayac/fugu-greetings)).
```

The MDN Web Docs Glossary [defines](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Progressive_Enhancement)
the concept as follows:

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Progressive enhancement is a design philosophy that centers around providing a baseline of
    essential content and functionality to as many users as possible, while at the same time going
    further and delivering the best possible experience only to users of the most modern browsers
    that can run all the required code.
  </p>
  <p>
    Feature detection is generally used to determine whether browsers can handle the high level
    content or not, with polyfills often being used to build in missing features with JavaScript.
  </p>
  <p>[…]</p>
  <p>
    It is a useful technique that allows Web developers to focus on developing the best possible
    websites while balancing the issues in those websites being accessed by multiple unknown
    user-agents. Graceful degradation is related but different—often seen as going in the opposite
    direction to progressive enhancement. In reality both approaches are valid and can often
    complement one another.
  </p>
</blockquote>

{%Aside 'note' %}

>   This is not an article on progressive enhancement, but assumes you are familiar

Author: I just mean this is not an intro to the concept of PE per se.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="100002010000058C000000CA65613FEC1D7FB3E2.png"
       alt="Safari Web Inspector showing the legacy files getting loaded.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Safari Web Inspector network tab.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000005800000012430B7B8786BF315DD.png"
       alt="Firefox Developer Tools showing the legacy files getting loaded.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Firefox Developer Tools network tab.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

However, on Chrome, a browser that supports the API, only the new scripts are loaded.
This is made elegantly possible thanks to
[dynamic `import()`](https://v8.dev/features/dynamic-import), which all modern browsers
[support](https://caniuse.com/#feat=es6-module-dynamic-import).
As I said earlier, the grass is pretty green these days.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000006FC0000021AD16A28BA8F5CBF1A.png"
       alt="">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Chrome DevTools network tab.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> 

Author: Thank you :-)

[Web Share Target API](https://web.dev/web-share-target/) allow me to do.
Mobile, and more recently desktop operating systems have gained native sharing
mechanisms.
For example, below is desktop Safari's share sheet on macOS triggered from an article on
my [blog](https://blog.tomayac.com/).
When you click the Share Article button, you can share a link to the article with a friend, for
example, via the native macOS Messages app.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="1000020100000356000001C434F5DD5D64721768.png"
       alt="Desktop Safari's share sheet on macOS triggered from an article's Share button"
       width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Web Share API on desktop Safari on macOS.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The code to make this happen is pretty straightforward. I call `navigator.share()` and
pass it an optional `title`, `text`, and `url` in an object.
But what if I want to attach an image? Level&nbsp;1 of the Web Share API doesn't support this yet.
The good news is that Web Share Level&nbsp;2 has added file sharing capabilities.

```js
try {
  await navigator.share({

>     title: '',

Author: The title doesn't really do much (it's mostly ignored in current implementations). I'll add one, though.

This is a problem that the [Contact Picker API](https://web.dev/contact-picker/) can solve.
Since I have my friend stored in my phone's contacts app,
via the Contacts Picker API, I can tap into my contacts from the web.

First, I need to specify the list of properties I want to access.
In this case, I only want the names,
but for other use cases I might be interested in telephone numbers, emails, avatar
icons, or physical addresses.
Next, I configure an `options` object and set `multiple` to `true`, so that I can select more
than one entry.
Finally, I can call `navigator.contacts.select()`, which returns the desired properties
for the user-selected contacts.

```js
const getContacts = async () => {
  const properties = ['name'];
  const options = { multiple: true };
  try {
    return await navigator.contacts.select(properties, options);
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

And by now you've probably learned the pattern:
I only load the file when the API is actually supported.

```js
if ('contacts' in navigator) {
  import('./contacts.mjs');
}
```

In Fugu Greeting, when I tap the Contacts button and select my two best pals,

> [Сергей Михайлович Брин](https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D0%91%D1%80%D0%B8%D0%BD,_%D0%A1%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B3%D0%B5%D0%B9_%D0%9C%D0%B8%D1%85%D0%B0%D0%B9%D0%BB%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B8%D1%87) and [劳伦斯·爱德华·"拉里"·佩奇](https://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E6%8B%89%E9%87%8C%C2%B7%E4%BD%A9%E5%A5%87),

Author: 🤡

      try {
        for (const type of clipboardItem.types) {
          const blob = await clipboardItem.getType(type);
          return blob;
        }
      } catch (err) {
        console.error(err.name, err.message);
      }
    }
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

And it's almost needless to say by now. I only do this on supporting browsers.

```js
if ('clipboard' in navigator && 'write' in navigator.clipboard) {
  import('./clipboard.mjs');
}
```

So how does this work in practice? I have an image open in the macOS Preview app and
copy it to the clipboard.
When I click Paste, the Fugu Greetings app then asks me
whether I want to allow the app to see text and images on the clipboard.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000006A2FE8CEB5EE2FB3F83.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app showing the clipboard permission prompt.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The clipboard permission prompt.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Finally, after accepting the permission, the image is then pasted into the application.
The other way round works, too.
Let me copy a greeting card to the clipboard.

> When I then open Preview and click "File" and then "New from Clipboard",

Author: Fixed.

the greeting card gets pasted into a new untitled image.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005A941A3287F1A5052A8.png"
       alt="The macOS Preview app with an untitled, just pasted image.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    An image pasted into the macOS Preview app.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## The Badging API

Another useful API is the [Badging API](https://web.dev/badging-api/).
As an installable PWA, Fugu Greetings of course does have an app icon
that users can place on the app dock or the home screen.
A fun and easy way to demonstrate the API is to (ab)use it in Fugu Greetings

> is to use it as a pen strokes counter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as a pen strokes counter.
```

      minInterval: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,
    });
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

The second step is to *listen* for the `periodicsync` event in the service worker.
If the event tag is `'image-of-the-day'`, that is, the one that was registered before,
the image of the day is retrieved via the `getImageOfTheDay()` function,
and the result propagated to all clients, so they can update their canvases and
caches.

```js
self.addEventListener('periodicsync', (syncEvent) => {
  if (syncEvent.tag === 'image-of-the-day-sync') {
    syncEvent.waitUntil(
      (async () => {
        const blob = await getImageOfTheDay();
        const clients = await self.clients.matchAll();
        clients.forEach((client) => {
          client.postMessage({
            image: blob,
          });
        });
      })()
    );
  }
});
```

Again this is truly a progressive enhancement, so the code is only loaded when the
API is supported by the browser.
This applies to both the client code and the service worker code.
On non-supporting browsers, neither of them is loaded.
Note how in the service worker, instead of a dynamic `import()`, I use the classic

> [`importScripts()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WorkerGlobalScope/importScripts).

Reviewer: Why `importScripts()` instead of `import()`?

Author: Because in service workers `import()` isn't supported yet. I'll add that info.

me when I want to be reminded to finish my greeting card.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005DB0D42F493ACFD1B53.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app with a prompt asking the user when they want to be reminded to finish their greeting card.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Scheduling a local notification to be reminded to finish a greeting card.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

When a scheduled notification triggers in Fugu Greetings,
it is shown just like any other notification, but as I wrote before,
it didn't require a network connection.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005E0B042853D0E77C225.png"
       alt="macOS Notification Center showing a triggered notification from Fugu Greetings."
       width="300">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The triggered notification appears in the macOS Notification Center.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## The Wake Lock API

I also want to include the [Wake Lock API](https://web.dev/wakelock/).
Sometimes you just need to stare long enough at the screen until inspiration

> kisses you.

Reviewer: > until inspiration kisses you

lol great phrase

Author: 💋💡

and the screen can be unlocked or locked.
If the user is idle, the canvas clears.
I give the idle detector a threshold of 60 seconds.

```js
const idleDetector = new IdleDetector();
idleDetector.addEventListener('change', () => {
  const userState = idleDetector.userState;
  const screenState = idleDetector.screenState;
  console.log(`Idle change: ${userState}, ${screenState}.`);
  if (userState === 'idle') {
    clearCanvas();
  }
});

await idleDetector.start({
  threshold: 60000,
  signal,
});
```

And as always, I only load this code when the browser supports it.

```js
if ('IdleDetector' in window) {
  import('./idle_detection.mjs');
}
```

In the Fugu Greetings app, the canvas clears when the Ephemeral checkbox is
checked and the user is idle for for too long.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005DBB930B1D3F8F5D1DA.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app with a cleared canvas after the user has been idle for too long.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    When the ephemeral checkbox is checked and the user has been idle for too long, the canvas is cleared.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Closing

> Phew, what a ride. So many APIs in just one sample app.

Reviewer: A long journey, but informative!

Author: Thank you :-) The idea is to show as many APIs in as non-contrived context as possible.

And, remember, I never make the user pay the download cost
for a feature that their browser doesn't support.
By using progressive enhancement, I make sure only the relevant code gets loaded.
And since with HTTP/2, requests are cheap, this pattern should work well for a lot of
applications,
although you might want to consider a bundler for really large apps.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000006E8D776365D6B538C9A.png"

>        alt="Chrome DevTools Network tab showing only requests for files with code that the current browser supports.">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       alt="Chrome DevTools Network panel showing only requests for files with code that the current browser supports.">
```
In the official docs I always refer to the top-level UI containers as `panels`. I believe the phrase predated me. I know `tab` is a more intuitive term but it would be nice to keep the alignment with the official docs terminology throughout this post.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="safari.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings running on desktop Safari, showing fewer available features."
       width="500">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    <a href="https://github.com/tomayac/fugu-greetings">Fugu Greetings</a> running on desktop Safari.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="chrome.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings running on desktop Chrome, showing many available features."
       width="500">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    <a href="https://github.com/tomayac/fugu-greetings">Fugu Greetings</a> running on desktop Chrome.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

If you're interested in the [Fugu Greetings](https://tomayac.github.io/fugu-greetings/public/) app,
go find and [fork it on GitHub](https://github.com/tomayac/fugu-greetings).

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005FB1EF077CDF01B8588.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings repo on GitHub.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    <a href="https://github.com/tomayac/fugu-greetings">Fugu Greetings</a> app on GitHub.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> We are working hard on making the grass greener when it comes to advanced Fugu APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chrome is working hard on making the grass greener when it comes to advanced Fugu APIs.
```

You can read more about the project on its
[landing page](https://web.dev/fugu-status).

Fugu Greetings is a drawing app that lets you create virtual greeting cards, and send
them to your loved ones. It exemplifies
[PWA's core concepts](https://web.dev/progressive-web-apps/). It's
[reliable](https://web.dev/reliable/) and fully offline enabled, so even if you don't
have a network, you can still use it. It's also [Installable](https://web.dev/install-criteria/)
to a device's home screen and integrates seamlessly with the operating system
as a stand-alone application.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000006A2F58B840608CEA761.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings PWA with a drawing that resembles the PWA community logo.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The <a href="https://tomayac.github.io/fugu-greetings/public/">Fugu Greetings</a> sample app.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Progressive enhancement

With this out of the way, it's time to talk about *progressive enhancement*.
The MDN Web Docs Glossary [defines](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Progressive_Enhancement)
the concept as follows:

<blockquote>
  <p>

>     Progressive enhancement is a design philosophy that centers around providing a baseline of
>     essential content and functionality to as many users as possible, while at the same time going
>     further and delivering the best possible experience only to users of the most modern browsers
>     that can run all the required code.
>   </p>
>   <p>
>     Feature detection is generally used to determine whether browsers can handle the high level
>     content or not, with polyfills often being used to build in missing features with JavaScript.
>   </p>
>   <p>[…]</p>
>   <p>
>     It is a useful technique that allows Web developers to focus on developing the best possible
>     websites while balancing the issues in those websites being accessed by multiple unknown
>     user-agents. Graceful degradation is related but different—often seen as going in the opposite
>     direction to progressive enhancement. In reality both approaches are valid and can often
>     complement one another.

Author: ```suggestion
    Progressive enhancement is a design philosophy that povides a baseline
    of essential content and functionality to as many users as possible,
    while delivering the best possible experience only to users
    of the most modern browsers that can run all the required code.
  </p>
  <p>
    [Feature detection](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Tools_and_testing/Cross_browser_testing/Feature_detection)
    is generally used to determine whether browsers can handle more modern functionality,
    while [polyfills](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Polyfill)
    are often used to add missing features with JavaScript.
  </p>
  <p>[…]</p>
  <p>  
    Progressive enhancement is a useful technique that allows web developers to focus
    on developing the best possible websites while making those websites work
    on multiple unknown user agents.
    [Graceful degradation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Graceful_degradation)
    is related, but is not the same thing and is often seen as going in the opposite direction
    to progressive enhancement.
    In reality, both approaches are valid and can often complement one another.
```

  </p>
</blockquote>

{%Aside 'note' %}

>   This is not an article on progressive enhancement, but assumes you are familiar

Author: ```suggestion
  This is not an introductory article on progressive enhancement, but assumes you are familiar
```

    import('./share.mjs');
  }
};
```

In Fugu Greetings, if I tap the Share button on a supporting browser like Chrome on Android,
the native share sheet opens.
I can, for example, choose Gmail, and the email composer widget pops up with the
image attached.

<div class="w-columns">
  <figure class="w-figure">
    <img class="w-screenshot"
        src="10000201000003E4000008004D3AEA65DB2ABA6C.png"
        alt="Native share sheet showing various apps to share the image to."
        width="300">
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
      Choosing an app to share the file to.
    </figcaption>
  </figure>

  <figure class="w-figure">
    <img class="w-screenshot"
        src="10000201000003E400000800D873C982E6D44C89.png"
        alt="Gmail's email compose widget with the image attached."
        width="300">
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
      The file gets attached to a new email in Gmail's composer.
    </figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

## The Contact Picker API

Next, I want to talk about contacts, meaning a device's address book
or contacts manager app.
When you write a greeting card, it may not always be easy to correctly write
someone's name.

> For example, I have a friend who prefers their name to be spelled in Cyrillic letters. I'm

Author: ```suggestion
For example, I have a friend Sergey who prefers his name to be spelled in Cyrillic letters. I'm
```

       alt="Fugu Greetings app showing the clipboard permission prompt.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The clipboard permission prompt.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Finally, after accepting the permission, the image is then pasted into the application.
The other way round works, too.
Let me copy a greeting card to the clipboard.
When I then open Preview and click "File" and then "New from Clipboard",
the greeting card gets pasted into a new untitled image.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005A941A3287F1A5052A8.png"
       alt="The macOS Preview app with an untitled, just pasted image.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    An image pasted into the macOS Preview app.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## The Badging API

Another useful API is the [Badging API](https://web.dev/badging-api/).
As an installable PWA, Fugu Greetings of course does have an app icon
that users can place on the app dock or the home screen.
A fun and easy way to demonstrate the API is to (ab)use it in Fugu Greetings
is to use it as a pen strokes counter.
I have added an event listener that on the `pointerdown` event increments the pen strokes

> counter and sets the icon.

Author: ```suggestion
and then sets the updated icon badge.
```

    registration.periodicSync.register('image-of-the-day-sync', {
      // An interval of one day.
      minInterval: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,
    });
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

The second step is to *listen* for the `periodicsync` event in the service worker.
If the event tag is `'image-of-the-day'`, that is, the one that was registered before,
the image of the day is retrieved via the `getImageOfTheDay()` function,
and the result propagated to all clients, so they can update their canvases and
caches.

```js
self.addEventListener('periodicsync', (syncEvent) => {
  if (syncEvent.tag === 'image-of-the-day-sync') {
    syncEvent.waitUntil(
      (async () => {
        const blob = await getImageOfTheDay();
        const clients = await self.clients.matchAll();
        clients.forEach((client) => {
          client.postMessage({
            image: blob,
          });
        });
      })()
    );
  }
});
```

Again this is truly a progressive enhancement, so the code is only loaded when the
API is supported by the browser.
This applies to both the client code and the service worker code.
On non-supporting browsers, neither of them is loaded.

> Note how in the service worker, instead of a dynamic `import()`, I use the classic

Author: ```suggestion
Note how in the service worker, instead of a dynamic `import()`
(that isn't supported in a service worker context yet), I use the classic
```

const requestWakeLock = async () => {
  wakeLock = await navigator.wakeLock.request('screen');
  wakeLock.addEventListener('release', () => {
    console.log('Wake Lock was released');
  });
  console.log('Wake Lock is active');
};

const handleVisibilityChange = () => {
  if (wakeLock !== null && document.visibilityState === 'visible') {
    requestWakeLock();
  }
};

document.addEventListener('visibilitychange', handleVisibilityChange);
document.addEventListener('fullscreenchange', handleVisibilityChange);
```

Yes, this is a progressive enhancement, so I only need to load it when the browser
supports the API.

```js
if ('wakeLock' in navigator && 'request' in navigator.wakeLock) {
  import('./wake_lock.mjs');
}
```
In Fugu Greetings, there's an insomnia checkbox that, when checked, keeps the
screen awake.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005DBCD9D10DD0A745315.png"
       alt="The insomnia checkbox, if checked, keeps the screen awake.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The insomnia checkbox keeps app awake.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## The Idle Detection API

At times, even if you stare at the screen for hours,

> it's just useless.

Author: ```suggestion
it's just useless and you can't come up with any idea what to do with your greeting card.
```

---
layout: post
title: Progressively enhance your Progressive Web App
subhead: Building for modern browsers and progressively enhancing like it's 2003
authors:
  - thomassteiner
description: |
  Learn how to progressively enhance your Progressive Web App so that it remains useful
  on all modern browsers, but delivers an advanced experience on browsers that support
  new web capabilities like native file system access, system clipboard access,
  contacts retrieval, periodic background sync, screen wake lock, web sharing features,
  and many more.
date: 2020-06-12
updated: 2020-06-15
tags:
  - blog
  - capabilities
  - fugu
  - progressive-web-apps
---

Back in March 2003, [Nick Finck](https://twitter.com/nickf) and
[Steve Champeon](https://twitter.com/schampeo) stunned the web design world
with the concept of
[progressive enhancement](http://www.hesketh.com/publications/inclusive_web_design_for_the_future/),
a strategy for web design that emphasizes core webpage content first,

> and that then progressively adds more nuanced

Author: "adds" is correct here, the strategy adds.

to be written in a cleaner style, avoiding the need to explicitly configure promise chains.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000000000009C400000304A19EF0FF1D72987D.png"
       alt="CanIUse support table for async functions showing support across all major browsers.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Async functions browser support table. (<a href="https://caniuse.com/#feat=async-functions">Source</a>)
  </figcaption>
</figure>

And even super recent ES&nbsp;2020 language additions like
[optional chaining](https://caniuse.com/#feat=mdn-javascript_operators_optional_chaining) and
[nullish coalescing](https://caniuse.com/#feat=mdn-javascript_operators_nullish_coalescing)
reach support really quickly—you can see a code sample below.
When it comes to core JavaScript features, the grass couldn't be much greener than it
is today.

```js
const adventurer = {
  name: 'Alice',
  cat: {
    name: 'Dinah',
  },
};
console.log(adventurer.dog?.name);
// Expected output: undefined
console.log(0 ?? 42);
// Expected output: 0
```

<figure class="w-figure w-figure--fullbleed">
  <img src="1000020100000640000003E810E16D93C747B2D5.png"

>        alt="The iconic Windows XP green grass background image.">

Author: This was in the original talk. It's more of a pun.

The MDN Web Docs Glossary [defines](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Progressive_Enhancement)
the concept as follows:

<blockquote>
  <p>
    Progressive enhancement is a design philosophy that centers around providing a baseline of
    essential content and functionality to as many users as possible, while at the same time going
    further and delivering the best possible experience only to users of the most modern browsers
    that can run all the required code.
  </p>
  <p>
    Feature detection is generally used to determine whether browsers can handle the high level
    content or not, with polyfills often being used to build in missing features with JavaScript.
  </p>
  <p>[…]</p>
  <p>
    It is a useful technique that allows Web developers to focus on developing the best possible
    websites while balancing the issues in those websites being accessed by multiple unknown
    user-agents. Graceful degradation is related but different—often seen as going in the opposite
    direction to progressive enhancement. In reality both approaches are valid and can often
    complement one another.
  </p>

> </blockquote>

Author: Perfect, took the new MDN text now.

{%Aside 'note' %}
  This article is not a full introduction to progressive enhancement, but assumes you are at least
  somewhat familiar with the concept.
  For a more profound foundation, I recommend Steve Champeon's article
  [Progressive Enhancement and the Future of Web Design](http://www.hesketh.com/progressive_enhancement_and_the_future_of_web_design.html).
{% endAside %}

Starting each greeting card from scratch can be really cumbersome.
So why not have a feature that allows users to import an image, and start from there?
With a traditional approach, you'd have used an
[`<input type=file>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/file)
element to make this happen.
First, you'd create the element, set its `type` and the to-be-`accept`ed MIME types,

> and then programmatically "click" it and listen for changes.

Author: No, you just call `.click()`, it's a programmatic click.

On browsers that currently don't support the Native File System API, I load the legacy scripts.
You can see the network tabs of Firefox and Safari below.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="100002010000058C000000CA65613FEC1D7FB3E2.png"
       alt="Safari Web Inspector showing the legacy files getting loaded.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Safari Web Inspector network tab.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000005800000012430B7B8786BF315DD.png"
       alt="Firefox Developer Tools showing the legacy files getting loaded.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Firefox Developer Tools network tab.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

However, on Chrome, a browser that supports the API, only the new scripts are loaded.
This is made elegantly possible thanks to
[dynamic `import()`](https://v8.dev/features/dynamic-import) that all modern browsers
[support](https://caniuse.com/#feat=es6-module-dynamic-import).
As I said earlier, the grass is pretty green these days.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000006FC0000021AD16A28BA8F5CBF1A.png"

>        alt="">

Author: Good find. Fixed.

Apart from storing for the eternity, maybe I actually want to share my greeting card.
This is something that the [Web Share API](https://web.dev/web-share/) and
[Web Share Target API](https://web.dev/web-share-target/) allow me to do.
Mobile, and more recently also desktop operating systems have gained native sharing
mechanisms.
For example, below is desktop Safari's share sheet on macOS triggered from an article on
my [blog](https://blog.tomayac.com/).
When you click the Share Article button, you can share a link to the article with a friend, for
example, via the native macOS Messages app.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="1000020100000356000001C434F5DD5D64721768.png"
       alt="Desktop Safari's share sheet on macOS triggered from an article's Share button"
       width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Web Share API on desktop Safari on macOS.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The code to make this happen is pretty straightforward. I call `navigator.share()` and
pass it an optional `title`, `text`, and `url` in an object.
But what if I want to attach an image? Level&nbsp;1 of the Web Share API doesn't support this yet.

> The good news is that Web Share Level&nbsp;2 has added file sharing capabilities.

Author: Here, I respectfully disagree. This is meant to show the evolvement from v1 to v2. Simple to more complex.

  console.warn(err.name, err.message);
}
```

Let me show you how to make this work with the Fugu Greeting card application.
First, I need to prepare a `data` object with a `files` array consisting of one blob, and then
a `title` and a `text`. Next, as a best practice, I make use of the new `navigator.canShare()` method that does
what its name suggests:
It tells me if the `data` object I'm trying to share can technically be shared by the browser.
If `navigator.canShare()` tells me the data can be shared, I'm in the final step ready to
call `navigator.share()` as before.
Again everything can fail, in the simplest way when the user cancels the sharing operation,
So it's all wrapped in `try...catch` blocks.

```js
const share = async (title, text, blob) => {
  const data = {
    files: [
      new File([blob], 'fugu-greeting.png', {
        type: blob.type,
      }),
    ],
    title: title,
    text: text,
  };
  try {
    if (!(navigator.canShare(data))) {
      throw new Error("Can't share data.", data);
    }
    await navigator.share(data);
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

As before, I use a progressive enhancement loading strategy.

> If both `'share'` and `'canShare'` exist on the `navigator` object, only then I go forward and

Author: Which we do, in this case we're really looking for the strings.

  }
};
```

In Fugu Greetings, if I tap the Share button on a supporting browser like Chrome on Android,
the native share sheet opens.
I can, for example, choose Gmail, and the email composer widget pops up with the
image attached.

<div class="w-columns">
  <figure class="w-figure">
    <img class="w-screenshot"
        src="10000201000003E4000008004D3AEA65DB2ABA6C.png"
        alt="Native share sheet showing various apps to share the image to."
        width="300">
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
      Choosing an app to share the file to.
    </figcaption>
  </figure>

  <figure class="w-figure">
    <img class="w-screenshot"
        src="10000201000003E400000800D873C982E6D44C89.png"
        alt="Gmail's email compose widget with the image attached."
        width="300">
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
      The file gets attached to a new email in Gmail's composer.
    </figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

## The Contact Picker API

Up next, I want to talk about contacts. And when I say contacts,
I mean contacts as in a device's address book or contacts manager app.
When you write a greeting card, it may not always be easy to correctly write
someone's name.

> For example, I have a friend who prefers their name to be spelled in Cyrillic letters. I'm

Author: It's a pun since my friends are Larry and Sergey, but I have added Sergey now to use his.

       alt="Badge icon on the Fugu Greetings app showing the number 7."
       width="300">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The pen strokes counter in form of the app icon badge reflects this.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## The Periodic Background Sync API

Want to start each day fresh with something new?
A neat feature of the Fugu Greetings app is that in can inspire you each morning
with a new background image to start your greeting card.
The app uses the [Periodic Background Sync API](https://web.dev/periodic-background-sync/)
to achieve this.

The first step is to *register* a periodic sync event in the service worker registration.
It listens for a sync tag called `'image-of-the-day'`
and has a minimum interval of one day,
so the user can get a new background image every 24 hours.

```js
const registerPeriodicBackgroundSync = async () => {
  const registration = await navigator.serviceWorker.ready;
  try {
    registration.periodicSync.register('image-of-the-day-sync', {
      // An interval of one day.
      minInterval: 24 * 60 * 60 * 1000,
    });
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

> The second step is to *listen* for the periodic sync event in the service worker.

Author: Before I emphasize register, now listen. It's two steps.

the image of the day is retrieved via the `getImageOfTheDay()` function,
and the result propagated to all clients, so they can update their canvases and
caches.

```js
self.addEventListener('periodicsync', (syncEvent) => {
  if (syncEvent.tag === 'image-of-the-day-sync') {
    syncEvent.waitUntil(
      (async () => {
        const blob = await getImageOfTheDay();
        const clients = await self.clients.matchAll();
        clients.forEach((client) => {
          client.postMessage({
            image: blob,
          });
        });
      })()
    );
  }
});
```

Again this is truly a progressive enhancement, so the code is only loaded when the
API is supported by the browser.
This applies to both the client code and the service worker code.
On non-supporting browsers, neither of them is loaded.
Note how in the service worker, instead of a dynamic `import()`

> (that isn't supported in a service worker context yet), I use the classic

Author: ```suggestion
(that isn't supported in a service worker context
[yet](https://github.com/w3c/ServiceWorker/issues/1356#issuecomment-433411852)),
I use the classic
```

[`importScripts()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WorkerGlobalScope/importScripts)
function to the same effect.

```js
// In the client:
const registration = await navigator.serviceWorker.ready;
if (registration && 'periodicSync' in registration) {
  import('./periodic_background_sync.mjs');
}
```

```js
// In the service worker:
if ('periodicSync' in self.registration) {
  importScripts('./image_of_the_day.mjs');
}
```

In Fugu Greetings, pressing the Wallpaper button reveals the greeting card image of the day
that is updated every day via the Periodic Background Sync API.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005E0B042853D0E77C224.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app with a new greeting card image of the day.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Pressing the Wallpaper button displays the image of the day.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

> ## Notification Triggers API

Author: I don't want this article to be a maintenance nightmare. The individual articles like https://web.dev/notification-triggers/ will be updated with the current status.

const requestWakeLock = async () => {
  wakeLock = await navigator.wakeLock.request('screen');
  wakeLock.addEventListener('release', () => {
    console.log('Wake Lock was released');
  });
  console.log('Wake Lock is active');
};

const handleVisibilityChange = () => {
  if (wakeLock !== null && document.visibilityState === 'visible') {
    requestWakeLock();
  }
};

document.addEventListener('visibilitychange', handleVisibilityChange);
document.addEventListener('fullscreenchange', handleVisibilityChange);
```

Yes, this is a progressive enhancement, so I only need to load it when the browser
supports the API.

```js
if ('wakeLock' in navigator && 'request' in navigator.wakeLock) {
  import('./wake_lock.mjs');
}
```
In Fugu Greetings, there's an insomnia checkbox that, when checked, keeps the
screen awake.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005DBCD9D10DD0A745315.png"
       alt="The insomnia checkbox, if checked, keeps the screen awake.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The insomnia checkbox keeps app awake.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## The Idle Detection API

At times, even if you stare at the screen for hours,

> it's just useless.

Author: I added more context.

The [Idle Detection API](https://web.dev/idle-detection/) allows the app to detect user idle time.
If the user is detected to be idle for too long, the app resets to the initial state
and clears the canvas.
This API is currently gated behind the
[notifications permission](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Notification/requestPermission),
since a lot of production use cases of idle detection are notifications-related,

> for example, to only send a notification to a device the user is currently actively using.

Author: It doesn't. Which is part of the discussion in https://github.com/WICG/idle-detection/issues/21.

  </figcaption>
</figure>

If you're interested in the [Fugu Greetings](https://tomayac.github.io/fugu-greetings/public/) app,
go find and [fork it on GitHub](https://github.com/tomayac/fugu-greetings).

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005FB1EF077CDF01B8588.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings repo on GitHub.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    <a href="https://github.com/tomayac/fugu-greetings">Fugu Greetings</a> app on GitHub.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The Chromium team is working hard on making the grass greener when it comes to advanced Fugu APIs.
By applying progressive enhancement in the development of my app,
I make sure that everybody gets a good, solid baseline experience,
but that people using browsers that support more Web platform APIs get an even better experience.
I'm looking forward to seeing what you do with progressive enhancement in your apps.

## Acknowledgements

I'm grateful to [Christian Liebel](https://christianliebel.com/) and
[Hemanth HM](https://h3manth.com/) who both have contributed to Fugu Greetings.

> This article was reviewed by [Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley).

Author: ```suggestion
This article was reviewed by [Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley) and
[Kayce Basques](https://github.com/kaycebasques).
[Jake Archibald](https://github.com/jakearchibald/) helped me find out the situation
with dynamic `import()` in a service worker context.
```

---
layout: post
title: Progressively enhance your Progressive Web App
subhead: Building for modern browsers and progressively enhancing like it's 2003
authors:
  - thomassteiner
description: |
  Learn how to progressively enhance your Progressive Web App so that it remains useful
  on all modern browsers, but delivers an advanced experience on browsers that support
  new web capabilities like native file system access, system clipboard access,
  contacts retrieval, periodic background sync, screen wake lock, web sharing features,
  and many more.

> date: 2020-06-12
> updated: 2020-06-15

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scheduled: true
date: 2020-07-01
# updated: 2020-06-15
```
@tomayac let's just merge this and rely on the fancy `scheduled: true` feature to deploy this at 7:00AM (PST) on the day of your talk?

https://web.dev/handbook/markup-post-codelab/#set-up-the-yaml

On browsers that currently don't support the Native File System API, I load the legacy scripts.
You can see the network tabs of Firefox and Safari below.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="100002010000058C000000CA65613FEC1D7FB3E2.png"
       alt="Safari Web Inspector showing the legacy files getting loaded.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Safari Web Inspector network tab.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000005800000012430B7B8786BF315DD.png"
       alt="Firefox Developer Tools showing the legacy files getting loaded.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Firefox Developer Tools network tab.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

However, on Chrome, a browser that supports the API, only the new scripts are loaded.
This is made elegantly possible thanks to
[dynamic `import()`](https://v8.dev/features/dynamic-import), which all modern browsers
[support](https://caniuse.com/#feat=es6-module-dynamic-import).
As I said earlier, the grass is pretty green these days.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000006FC0000021AD16A28BA8F5CBF1A.png"

>        alt="">

Author: ```suggestion
       alt="Chrome DevTools showing the modern files getting loaded.">
```

       alt="Fugu Greetings app with a file open dialog.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The file open dialog.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005DB01941257D7BE6A85.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app now with an imported image.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The imported image.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005DBCBE1B58EC828BB29.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app with the modified image.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Saving the modified image to a new file.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## The Web Share and Web Share Target APIs

Apart from storing for eternity, maybe I actually want to share my greeting card.
This is something that the [Web Share API](https://web.dev/web-share/) and
[Web Share Target API](https://web.dev/web-share-target/) allow me to do.
Mobile, and more recently desktop operating systems have gained native sharing
mechanisms.
For example, below is desktop Safari's share sheet on macOS triggered from an article on
my [blog](https://blog.tomayac.com/).

> When you click the Share Article button, you can share a link to the article with a friend, for

Author: ```suggestion
When you click the **Share Article** button, you can share a link to the article with a friend, for
```

example, via the native macOS Messages app.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="1000020100000356000001C434F5DD5D64721768.png"
       alt="Desktop Safari's share sheet on macOS triggered from an article's Share button"
       width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Web Share API on desktop Safari on macOS.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The code to make this happen is pretty straightforward. I call `navigator.share()` and
pass it an optional `title`, `text`, and `url` in an object.
But what if I want to attach an image? Level&nbsp;1 of the Web Share API doesn't support this yet.
The good news is that Web Share Level&nbsp;2 has added file sharing capabilities.

```js
try {
  await navigator.share({

>     title: '',

Author: ```suggestion
    title: 'Check out this article:',
```

what its name suggests:
It tells me if the `data` object I'm trying to share can technically be shared by the browser.
If `navigator.canShare()` tells me the data can be shared, I'm ready to
call `navigator.share()` as before.
Because everything can fail, I'm again using a `try...catch` block.

```js
const share = async (title, text, blob) => {
  const data = {
    files: [
      new File([blob], 'fugu-greeting.png', {
        type: blob.type,
      }),
    ],
    title: title,
    text: text,
  };
  try {
    if (!(navigator.canShare(data))) {
      throw new Error("Can't share data.", data);
    }
    await navigator.share(data);
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

As before, I use progressive enhancement.
If both `'share'` and `'canShare'` exist on the `navigator` object, only then I go forward and
load `share.mjs` via dynamic `import()`.
On browsers like mobile Safari that only fulfill one of the two conditions, I don't load
the functionality.

```js
const loadShare = () => {
  if ('share' in navigator && 'canShare' in navigator) {
    import('./share.mjs');
  }
};
```

> In Fugu Greetings, if I tap the Share button on a supporting browser like Chrome on Android,

Author: ```suggestion
In Fugu Greetings, if I tap the **Share** button on a supporting browser like Chrome on Android,
```

> In Fugu Greetings, if I tap the Share button on a supporting browser like Chrome on Android,

Author: ```suggestion
In Fugu Greetings, if I tap the Share button on a supporting browser like Chrome on Android,
```

using a German QWERTZ keyboard and have no idea how to type their name.
This is a problem that the [Contact Picker API](https://web.dev/contact-picker/) can solve.
Since I have my friend stored in my phone's contacts app,
via the Contacts Picker API, I can tap into my contacts from the web.

First, I need to specify the list of properties I want to access.
In this case, I only want the names,
but for other use cases I might be interested in telephone numbers, emails, avatar
icons, or physical addresses.
Next, I configure an `options` object and set `multiple` to `true`, so that I can select more
than one entry.
Finally, I can call `navigator.contacts.select()`, which returns the desired properties
for the user-selected contacts.

```js
const getContacts = async () => {
  const properties = ['name'];
  const options = { multiple: true };
  try {
    return await navigator.contacts.select(properties, options);
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

And by now you've probably learned the pattern:
I only load the file when the API is actually supported.

```js
if ('contacts' in navigator) {
  import('./contacts.mjs');
}
```

> In Fugu Greeting, when I tap the Contacts button and select my two best pals,

Author: ```suggestion
In Fugu Greeting, when I tap the **Contacts** button and select my two best pals,
```

  }
};
```

To paste, I need to loop over the clipboard items that I obtain by calling
`navigator.clipboard.read()`.
The reason for this is that multiple clipboard items might be on the clipboard in
different representations.
Each clipboard item has a `types` field that tells me the MIME types of the available
resources.
I call the clipboard item's `getType()` method, passing the
MIME type I obtained before.

```js
const paste = async () => {
  try {
    const clipboardItems = await navigator.clipboard.read();
    for (const clipboardItem of clipboardItems) {
      try {
        for (const type of clipboardItem.types) {
          const blob = await clipboardItem.getType(type);
          return blob;
        }
      } catch (err) {
        console.error(err.name, err.message);
      }
    }
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err.name, err.message);
  }
};
```

And it's almost needless to say by now. I only do this on supporting browsers.

```js
if ('clipboard' in navigator && 'write' in navigator.clipboard) {
  import('./clipboard.mjs');
}
```

So how does this work in practice? I have an image open in the macOS Preview app and
copy it to the clipboard.

> When I click Paste, the Fugu Greetings app then asks me

Author: ```suggestion
When I click **Paste**, the Fugu Greetings app then asks me
```

whether I want to allow the app to see text and images on the clipboard.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000006A2FE8CEB5EE2FB3F83.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app showing the clipboard permission prompt.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The clipboard permission prompt.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Finally, after accepting the permission, the image is then pasted into the application.
The other way round works, too.
Let me copy a greeting card to the clipboard.

> When I then open Preview and click "File" and then "New from Clipboard",

Author: ```suggestion
When I then open Preview and click **File** and then **New from Clipboard**,
```

    syncEvent.waitUntil(
      (async () => {
        const blob = await getImageOfTheDay();
        const clients = await self.clients.matchAll();
        clients.forEach((client) => {
          client.postMessage({
            image: blob,
          });
        });
      })()
    );
  }
});
```

Again this is truly a progressive enhancement, so the code is only loaded when the
API is supported by the browser.
This applies to both the client code and the service worker code.
On non-supporting browsers, neither of them is loaded.
Note how in the service worker, instead of a dynamic `import()`
(that isn't supported in a service worker context
[yet](https://github.com/w3c/ServiceWorker/issues/1356#issuecomment-433411852)),
I use the classic
[`importScripts()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WorkerGlobalScope/importScripts).

```js
// In the client:
const registration = await navigator.serviceWorker.ready;
if (registration && 'periodicSync' in registration) {
  import('./periodic_background_sync.mjs');
}
```

```js
// In the service worker:
if ('periodicSync' in self.registration) {
  importScripts('./image_of_the_day.mjs');
}
```

> In Fugu Greetings, pressing the Wallpaper button reveals the greeting card image of the day

Author: ```suggestion
In Fugu Greetings, pressing the **Wallpaper** button reveals the greeting card image of the day
```

that is updated every day via the Periodic Background Sync API.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005E0B042853D0E77C224.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app with a new greeting card image of the day.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">

>     Pressing the Wallpaper button displays the image of the day.

Author: ```suggestion
    Pressing the <strong>Wallpaper</strong> button displays the image of the day.
```

Sometimes even with a lot of inspiration, you need a nudge to finish a started greeting
card.
This is a feature that is enabled by the [Notification Triggers API](https://web.dev/notification-triggers/).
As a user, I can enter a time when I want to be nudged to finish my greeting card.
When that time comes, I will get a notification that my greeting card is waiting.

After prompting for the target time,
the application schedules the notification with a `showTrigger`.
This can be a `TimestampTrigger` with the previously selected target date.
The reminder notification will be triggered locally, no network or server side is needed.

```js
const targetDate = promptTargetDate();
if (targetDate) {
  const registration = await navigator.serviceWorker.ready;
  registration.showNotification('Reminder', {
    tag: 'reminder',
    body: "It's time to finish your greeting card!",
    showTrigger: new TimestampTrigger(targetDate),
  });
}
```

As with everything else I have shown so far, this is a progressive enhancement,
so the code is only conditionally loaded.

```js
if ('Notification' in window && 'showTrigger' in Notification.prototype) {
  import('./notification_triggers.mjs');
}
```

> When I check the Reminder checkbox in Fugu Greetings, a prompt asks

Author: ```suggestion
When I check the **Reminder** checkbox in Fugu Greetings, a prompt asks
```

The Wake Lock API can prevent this from happening.

The first step is to obtain a wake lock with the `navigator.wakelock.request method()`.
I pass it the string `'screen'` to obtain a screen wake lock.
I then add an event listener to be informed when the wake lock is released.
This can happen, for example, when the tab visibility changes.
If this happens, I can, when the tab becomes visible again, re-obtain the wake lock.

```js
let wakeLock = null;
const requestWakeLock = async () => {
  wakeLock = await navigator.wakeLock.request('screen');
  wakeLock.addEventListener('release', () => {
    console.log('Wake Lock was released');
  });
  console.log('Wake Lock is active');
};

const handleVisibilityChange = () => {
  if (wakeLock !== null && document.visibilityState === 'visible') {
    requestWakeLock();
  }
};

document.addEventListener('visibilitychange', handleVisibilityChange);
document.addEventListener('fullscreenchange', handleVisibilityChange);
```

Yes, this is a progressive enhancement, so I only need to load it when the browser
supports the API.

```js
if ('wakeLock' in navigator && 'request' in navigator.wakeLock) {
  import('./wake_lock.mjs');
}
```

> In Fugu Greetings, there's an insomnia checkbox that, when checked, keeps the

Author: ```suggestion
In Fugu Greetings, there's an **Insomnia** checkbox that, when checked, keeps the
```

screen awake.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005DBCD9D10DD0A745315.png"
       alt="The insomnia checkbox, if checked, keeps the screen awake.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">

>     The insomnia checkbox keeps app awake.

Author: ```suggestion
    The <strong>Insomnia</strong> checkbox keeps app awake.
```

[notifications permission](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Notification/requestPermission),
since a lot of production use cases of idle detection are notifications-related,
for example, to only send a notification to a device the user is currently actively using.

After making sure that the notifications permission is granted, I then instantiate the
idle detector.
I register an event listener that listens for idle changes, which includes the user and
the screen state.
The user can be active or idle,
and the screen can be unlocked or locked.
If the user is idle, the canvas clears.
I give the idle detector a threshold of 60 seconds.

```js
const idleDetector = new IdleDetector();
idleDetector.addEventListener('change', () => {
  const userState = idleDetector.userState;
  const screenState = idleDetector.screenState;
  console.log(`Idle change: ${userState}, ${screenState}.`);
  if (userState === 'idle') {
    clearCanvas();
  }
});

await idleDetector.start({
  threshold: 60000,
  signal,
});
```

And as always, I only load this code when the browser supports it.

```js
if ('IdleDetector' in window) {
  import('./idle_detection.mjs');
}
```

> In the Fugu Greetings app, the canvas clears when the Ephemeral checkbox is

Author: ```suggestion
In the Fugu Greetings app, the canvas clears when the **Ephemeral** checkbox is
```

checked and the user is idle for for too long.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img class="w-screenshot"
       src="10000201000009C4000005DBB930B1D3F8F5D1DA.png"
       alt="Fugu Greetings app with a cleared canvas after the user has been idle for too long.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">

>     When the ephemeral checkbox is checked and the user has been idle for too long, the canvas is cleared.

Author: ```suggestion
    When the <strong>Ephemeral</strong> checkbox is checked and the user has been idle for too long, the canvas is cleared.
```

---
layout: post
title: Progressively enhance your Progressive Web App
subhead: Building for modern browsers and progressively enhancing like it's 2003
authors:
  - thomassteiner
description: |
  Learn how to progressively enhance your Progressive Web App so that it remains useful
  on all modern browsers, but delivers an advanced experience on browsers that support
  new web capabilities like native file system access, system clipboard access,
  contacts retrieval, periodic background sync, screen wake lock, web sharing features,
  and many more.
date: 2020-06-09
updated: 2020-06-11
tags:
  - blog
  - capabilities
  - fugu
  - progressive-web-apps
---

Back in March 2003, Nick Finck and Steve Champeon stunned the web design world

> with the concept of progressive enhancement.
> A strategy for web design that emphasizes core webpage content first,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the concept of progressive enhancement,
a strategy for web design that emphasizes core webpage content first,
```

Author: Done
